# R Analysis: Increased UV-B during the _Laschamps Event_
This repository contains all the R code used in 

**Reduced geomagnetic shielding increased UV-B radiation at Earth’s surface during the _Laschamps Event_** 

by Heaton TJ, Wilkinson-Rowe E, Krüger LC, Bard E, Lane C, McGuire A, Robson TM, Takeshi Nakagawa T & Seddon AWR  

(Researchsquare version available at - **to update**)

## Installation of required packages 
To implement the manuscript code, you will also need to have installed the following libraries:

- `ggplot2`
- `cowplot`
- `readr`
- `tidyverse`
- `colorBlindness`
- `aod`

These libraries can be installed  using, e.g., :
``` r
install.packages("ggplot2") # This code used version 3.4.2
```

## Repository Format 
The repository provides a set of folders:

- `R` --- the R code used to generate the results in the paper
- `data` --- folder containing the raw data with self-describing subfolders and filenames
- `output` --- figures generated by R code (and used in thr manuscript)

The code to perform all the analyses (and to generate the figures used in the manuscript) can all be found here. You will need to ensure you have downloaded all the folders and subfolders. To run the code, you should set the working directory to be the main folder. You can then source the individual analyses, e.g., `source("R/001_UV_B_Analysis_Final.R")`

All UV-B doses are calculated according to the Flint and Caldwell (2003) biological spectral weighting function and are denoted <sub>BE</sub>.  


## R scripts
All scripts can be found in the `R/` directory. The only scripts which need to be directly runs/sourced are entitled e.g. `001_`, `002_`, ... all others scripts are called within these master scripts. These master scripts are all independent of one another (they are self-contained). The R files directly print summaries of the key inferences made during the analyses to the terminal window (as well as the manuscript plots). The analyses are:

### Analysis of subfossil Lake Suigetsu _Pinus D._ pollen (Main Analysis)

- *001_UV_B_Analysis_Final.R*

This performs the main manuscript analysis of the sub-fossil Lake Suigetsu pollen from our designed five sampled periods (1.3, 8, 41, 53 and 65ka BP). Specifically, we analyse:

1. p-CA content (including Figures 2 and S4)
2. Malformation probabilities (including Figure 3)

It will also create a plot of the design space (Figure S3). As the analysis runs then it will print key information to the R terminal. All plots will be saved as png files in the `data` folder. 

### Analysis of cultivar greenhouse experiment 

- *002_Analyse_Cultivar_Experiment.R*

Independent analysis of the greenhouse experiment on 60 cultivars of Pinus mugo var. Mumpitz reported in Materials and Methods. This experiment considers the relative p-CA response between a treatment group (irradiated with UV-B dose of 16.8 kJ m<sup>-2</sup> day<sup>-1</sup><sub>BE</sub>) and control group having no UV-B exposure (i.e., 0 kJ m<sup>-2</sup> day<sup>-1</sup><sub>BE</sub>). This code also generates Figure S6. 

The analysis mimics that performed when comparing the relative increase in p-CA in subfossil pollen from the _Laschamps Event_ when compared to the other time periods sampled in the Lake Suigetsu sediment core.    

### Analysis of present day UV-B levels in Raleigh, N. California (USA) 

- *003_Analyse_USDA_Present_Day.R*

Calculates the mean present-day UV-B dose in Raleigh, N. Carolina (35˚ 73' N, 78˚ 68' W, 120m amsl) based on daily measurements from 1st March - 31st May (the expected period of pollen production for Pinus D.) available from the USDA at https://uvb.nrel.colostate.edu/UVB/.  

Raleigh is intended to provide a close analogue to Lake Suigetsu (35˚ 35' N, 135˚ 53' E, 0m amsl) being at an almost identical latitude and altitude. To calculate the present-day UV-B fluxes, we use the years from 2005–2024 (although the years 2020 and 2021 are entirely missing from the USDA database due to the impact of COVID-19).  

### Addition: Pre-processing of GCMS data to obtain pCA values

The code to perform the pre-processing steps to obtain the pCA values for both the sub-fossil Lake Suigetsu pollen samples and the greenhouse cultivar experiments is found in the subdirectory:

- `GCMS_preprocessing`

This code is self-contained can be run independently (the documentation is contained within the subdirectory) and will output the GCMS/pCA values used for analysis in the main paper.  











